Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
developer express, become a UI
superhero with dev express controls
and libraries. Deliver elegant.net solutions
that address customer needs today
by leveraging your existing knowledge,
you can build next generation
touch enabled solutions for tomorrow,
you can download your free
30 day trial@dxdothanselminutes.com. That's dx.hanselminutes.com
dot com. It's Hansel
minutes, a weekly discussion with
web developer and technologist Scott
Hanselman. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number 565. In this
episode, Scott talks with Samsung
engineer and developer advocate. ADA
Rose Edwards. How about web VR?
Hi, this is Scott Hanselman.
This is another episode of
Hansel minutes today. I'm talking
with ADA Rose Edwards. She is
a senior developer at Samsung
and working on web VR.
How are you? I'm really
good. Thank you. Yeah. Thanks
for taking the time to
chat with me today. Thank
you for having me. So
you've been a developer for
a long time and you've
worked on PlayStation and you
worked at the financial times
and now you're at, at
Samsung and you're doing all
kinds of stuff. You also
blog and write code and
you have amazing get hub
activity graph that I'm jealous
of. Yeah, well it shows
how, how bad I am
at managing my free time.
Yeah. So this shows that
you're not, you don't have
work life balance, but it
sounds like you love your
work. I do. I love
it very much. I, yeah,
I do it every day
for fun. So, so you've
written a number of things
on kind of the future
of the web. And you've
been focused on, on web
VR lately. Do you have
a lot of VR machines
at your, at your house?
Yeah. So in front of
me right now, there's three,
give yours a Google daydream,
HTC, Vive, and a box
full of cardboards. So you
could say I'm a bit
of a fan. No, I've
had a couple of people
on the show to talk
about virtual reality in general,
I'm interested in your opinion.
I have a Vive and
you know, it's great, but
it really seems kind of
kind of early. Yes. So
we're definitely in the early
days of VR right now,
it's, it's going through a
lot of growth spurts, but
the nice thing about it
is that it's really hit
the web big time in
the last few years. So
it's got to the point
now where, where a developer
can come build something and
distribute it to a variety
of VR platforms without needing
to worry about exactly what
that delivering it to which,
which I think will make
it available to a lot
of developers to work with.
When I started doing VR
on my windows machine, it
seems like it's split into
the Vive people and the
Oculus people. And there's a
lot of like, fighting about
who's going to win. And
there also seems to be
a lot of exclusives, like
that's an Oculus exclusive and
you can't run that on
a Vive. I hope we
don't end up with the
web like that. So the
nice thing about VR on
the web is that it
works on all devices and
I, so I think out
of fights like that, the
only winner is going to
be the web at the
end of the day, because
I can build a VR
experience and I can target
it, both the Oculus rift
and HTC Vive, but I
can also put it on
the gear VR and Google
cardboards and on daydream as
well. So I don't need
to worry so much about
where it's going and because
VR is still very niche
and there are a wide
variety of, of hardware out
that people are using. I
think if you build something
and put out through the
web that allows you to
reach all of them at
once. So you don't have
to worry so much about
that. You're only targeting a
particular niche. Hmm. And we
wouldn't want it to be,
you know, separated. Like, I
wouldn't want to say, I
need to buy us a
gear VR to watch it,
to look at a JPEG.
You know, that, that, that's
the kind of thing we're
talking about. Yeah, definitely not
that if, if the future's
like that, then I think
my job as an advocate
for the web has gone
horribly wrong because, because at
the end of the day,
the web is all about
togetherness and trying to get,
and building one thing which
works across a wide variety
of platforms and works for
everybody no matter where they
are in the world or,
or, or who, or who
they are. It sounds, it
sounds like if I can
take just a little bit
of a detour for a
second that you, you and
I are very similar in
that we both went to
giant company and probably our
open web web friends thought
of us as being kind
of a, you know, Oh,
you sold out, look, you
went to big, but we
went there to move the
open web forward. Yeah. Like
I would like, I wouldn't
be working at Samsung if,
if they didn't support the
open web. When I interviewed
with them, they really wowed
me with, with the steps
they're taking to, to bring
the web forward into the
future. So they have their
own web browser, something internet,
which works on the gear
VR as well, which is
puts me in an interesting
position because in regards to
virtual reality, because it's one
of the, it's one of
the few web browsers that
actually focuses on virtual reality.
So yeah. Samsung are doing
a lot in for the
web. Well, they're one of
the, they're the second largest
contributor to the chromium project
after, after Google and they're,
they're on the W3C committees
for progressive web apps and
virtual reality. And they, yeah,
they've really get stuck in
it before I worked there.
I never even considered Samsung
in the browser space, but
it was been really surprising.
It's been a great place
to be, They've got their
own browsers so that they
can say here is how
a browser should do VR
correctly. And almost like this
is the lighthouse that you
should, you should follow. They're
setting the tone for Chrome.
And for Safari, I would
assume I'd like to think
so. I mean, like we
were the first VR browser,
so I'd like to think
were leading the pack, but
I think what I'd actually
rather see is everyone take
their own different approaches to
how they think a VR
browser should be. Because at
the end of the day,
the web grows through diversity.
And, and if one person
sets says, this is how
it should be and everyone
copies it, we're going to
end up missing out on
a lot of possible variations,
which could end up being
a stronger pattern. Mm, okay.
So it's really more of
an exemplar and we're going
to bounce back and forth
as we move the web
forward as it as a,
as a group, as a
team. I think so. Yeah.
It's definitely, I'm a very
like where the web VR
community is, is very strong
where we're allies not rivals
and people from very large
companies. So Oculus and Google
and Mozilla and Samsung, we're
all, we're all together trying
to, trying to do something
with the weapon VR, because
I think not only can
VR do a lot for
the web, but I think
the web can do a
lot for VR as well.
Now you've got a great,
I got a great article
that you wrote called a
Christmas Carol for the web
future, where you talk about
the ghosts of web pass
that goes to web presence.
And it feels like we're
just now getting out of
the ghost of web past,
which is, you know, you
visit a website on a,
on a, on a PC
or a Mac and it
looks great. Then you visited
on your, your phone. And
then it's like, download our
app. And the same thing
is happening in VR. I'm
looking, I have a car,
a Google cardboard for my
iPhone. And I also have
like 19 apps like that
are all in like this
little VR with a poop
emoji folder because it's like,
here's all this VR crap
that I've littered my phone
with. Are we heading in
that direction with VR? So
the way it's going right
now with native, it does
seem that way. But hopefully
with web VR taking off,
as much as it heads,
we're not gonna, we should
see much fewer sites forcing
someone to download, download an
entire, just to use it
for two or three minutes.
And the nice thing about
web VR is that because
a lot of the runtime
is in your browser, like
built in, you only need
to download the assets and
the libraries to do the,
the web GL bits and
bobs. So you end up
with this really lovely experience
where you go to a
URL and you can, and
then when the page is
loaded, which hopefully should only
take a few seconds. You're
already to put your device
into your headset or to
put on your, your HTC
Vive or Oculus rift and
jumped straight into the experience.
And that's the beautiful thing
with VR on the web.
I think of web VR
layers on top of web
GL, is that correct? I'd
say they're more side by
side. So web GL handles
a lot of the rendering
and the web VR APIs.
They provide an interface to
the virtual reality hardware such
as the controllers and the
headset. So for example, they'll
tell you the position, the
rotation of the Vive controllers
or the, or the Oculus
touch controllers. They'll tell you
the position, the rotation of
the headset and they'll, and
the specifications for the lenses.
They'll also give you also
provide methods, which you can
use to send essentially just
canvas information to the headset
and, or render whatever's on
the canvas. So you don't
have to use web VR.
You could, if you really
wanted to render with just
canvas today, of course, that's
not an option because it's
not fast enough, but it's
just ties into the canvas.
So the, the API is
that they're still in, they're
still in development right now.
I think they're on web
VR, 1.1 or 1.2. And,
but as, as they go
along, they're, they're really settling
down and, and there's a
really great polyfill for them.
So which allows you to
use them for on iPhones
and Androids with just a
Google cardboard and they will
work. And if you're on
a, like a recent Chrome
browser or, or Mozilla or
work natively with your HTC
Vive. So a lot of
things kind of work out
the box, but if you're
dealing with the web via
APIs that kind of accessible
to work with as a,
as a developer, but generally
I would suggest just find
a library to do it
for you. Okay. So like
right now I'm looking at
some of the stereo rendering
source. I started@webvr.info and kind
of found my way there.
And I see the kinds
of APIs. I'd expect a
talking to a device to
like, you know, enumerate them,
you know, get VR displays
and things like that. So,
but this is something that
someone who already knows how
to do canvas or already
knows how to do web
is going to feel reasonably
comfortable with, it's not a
whole new world. It's building
on stuff that we already
know how to do. Yeah.
If you've been, if you've
been working with three dot
JS and you feel really
comfortable with it, it's, it's
not significant. It's not that
difficult to actually build something
with three GS and then
use the native web VR
APIs to make it work
in virtual reality. But many
developers aren't super comfortable with
working with three JS, even
though the web GL API
has been around for a
long time. It's definitely not
in the remit of, of,
of most web developers. So
I definitely suggest usually one
of the many tools out
there, which, which handle a
lot of the web GL
stuff for you. So just
to make sure some people
may not have understood what
you said, they're three dot
JS. You actually spelled out
the word three js.org is
a, an abstraction layer on
top of all the different
3d stuff in your browser.
Yeah. So three dot JS
is a, it's a library,
a really very, very well
done library for bringing web
GL to humans effectively. Like
if you, if you just
try and rendering a cube
with pure web GL, it's,
it's doable, but you're gonna
have reams. And if you
were to print out, you'd
have reams and reams of
paper, like you ended up
writing an awful lot of
boiler plate. So three dot
JS, abstracts away, a lot
of the boiler plate and
allows you to, to make
a web GL scene using
Java script, which a developer
might be more comfortable with.
Yeah. I'm looking at this
right now. And I feel
like, I almost feel like
when I look at examples
of 3d libraries like this,
the examples are themselves more
impressive than anything I see
on the web. Like, I'm
not, you know, you don't
see this stuff at like
a news site or wandering
around the web. It does.
It feels like it's, it's,
it's at a beginning stage
because otherwise I would have
bumped into things that were
amazing. Like this just w
just browsing the web regularly.
There's lots of API. So
that actually, which seem to
be, which has been around
for a long time and
a very powerful, but haven't,
I don't think received there,
like aren't as impressive as
they could be, like in
the way they've been used.
And I think VR is
making us rethink a lot
of APIs, entirely new ways.
For example, recently I built
a virtual reality app for
a conference. And, and so
as well as doing the
three D rendering web GL,
and it looked very pretty,
I used web sockets to
keep the entire audience synchronized
amongst one another, so that
they're able to, so that
they're able to see each
other in virtual space and
see me as well and
see 3d slides where I'm
just bringing content into existence
in front of them. I
think it worked pretty well,
and it managed to keep
over a hundred people, sink
toilet once and not fail.
So like, I think we're
going to see a lot
more stuff like that. And
another thing as well, which
I really like is the
web RTC API APIs. So
normally they use for stuff
like Hangouts or video conferencing.
But now I think we're
going to see a lot
more use of people talking
to each other in virtual
reality where their voice is
being sent via web RTC
and their position data or
the data associated with their
controllers or any, or any
of their virtual reality input
devices are all going to
be sent via web RTC
data channels. So I think
it's gonna be some cool
stuff coming out of unexpected
areas. When w if you
don't mind my asking, when
you put that together, you
know, how, how hard was
that like the barrier for
me seems that seems immense.
Like I would, it would
take me weeks to build
something like that. So I
built that in four days.
So the, the environment I
built using a library called
a frame, which allows you
to Mark up 3d scene
using web GL, but you
don't have to write any
JavaScript. You just Mark it
up using custom HTML elements.
And then the, to be
honest, the sinking bit was
quite easy. I, what I
did, I, I took a
users position, rotation data. I
stored it as a, as
into a, into array buffer
and setting that up to
the server as raw byte
data, the server just concatenated
everyone's raw byte data and
sent it back down again.
And people just rebuilt like
place other people's avatars in
the same place where they
were in the scene. And
because a friend uses custom
HTML elements, I was able
to use Java script. I
was really familiar with so
like dot HTML or element
dot set attribute in order
to update the position, the
rotation of all the avatars.
So it libraries like that
make it really accessible to,
to, to do really interesting
stuff in VR, because it
means you don't have to
think about the VR aspect
anymore. You just have to
think about what you're trying
to accomplish. Ah, okay. So
I'm looking at a frame,
a frame.io. And so I
could go and say, I
want a box. I want
a sphere. I want a
sky. I could do that
with JavaScript. Right. I could
use three dot JS and
I could do, I could
programmatically declare boxes and spheres
and put a sky around
them, or I can do
it in just kind of
quasi HTML. And that then
gets translated into web VR.
Yes, precisely. So a frame
is built upon three dot
JS. So if you want
to extend a frame or
do anything advance with that,
you can fall back to
any preexisting, three dot, JS
knowledge you might have, or,
or take advantage of one
of the many, three dot
JS tutorials and examples out
there. But the nice thing
about it is that because
it's got this large community
and it's based on HTML,
you can Mark it up
and you don't really have
to worry so much about
that. And it gives you
a lot of stuff, a
lot of boilerplate built in.
So you don't have to
declare your camera and your
lights and your VR scene.
You just you'd right. You
create a dash scene as
a Dom element, and then
it gives you a canvas
and sets up your render
loop. It gives you some
lights and you can an,
a camera and even a
button, which when you click
on it enters VR. And
then you can use like
the ACE guy element to
set an image as the
box and like an aid
box to drop a box
in there. And it allows
you to prototype stuff really
quickly. So even if you
were in a professional setting
where you wanted to do
a very performance web GL
scene, a frame is greater
prototyping, but if you're like
me and not super comfortable
with writing raw web GL
or, or doing complex three
D stuff, then Hey frame
is a really great place
to get started. And you
can, you can build something
and share it very quickly.
Like, one of the things
I like doing is using
JS Ben or one of
the pair programming websites out
there, and I just include
the A-frame library and I
can write up some HTML,
which is, which is a
virtual reality scene. And I
can send that to someone
and they can use that
on the spot, which is
really nice. And then they
can start editing it and
sharing it themselves, which is
a, I think a beautiful
thing. Is there any reason
why I wouldn't want to,
you, you used the, you
used a frame in the
context of prototyping. W does
that imply that I would
then stop using it and
move to something else? If
I was to kind of
quote, unquote, get serious, or
could I go to production
with a frame? So I'd
say for the majority of
web developers, a frame is
going to be fantastic and
it's going to be probably
all, all you need, especially
if you're pro, especially for
doing smaller demos or things
with single scenes. But if
you want to, like, for
example, if you wanted to
remake quake in the browser,
you'd probably use unity or
play canvas, or one of
the more interactive editors where
you can, you can inspect
the scene as you're doing
it. And, and it's more,
much more visual. And it's
so way of working, which
3d developers who've been working
with tools like blender and
Maya, maybe more, maybe more
used to, Okay. So let's,
let's pivot a little bit,
and let's talk about how
we make this, you know,
like regular people use VR,
right? Like I bought an
HTC Vive for Christmas. It
was like my gift to
myself. But whenever I use
it, I feel like it's
a big deal. And, and
that's not a bad thing.
It's just like, okay, I'm
going to do VR now.
And I gotta plug this
big headset in, and it's
got three giant long cables
and there's things that are
mounted on the wall. So
I can walk around. Sometimes
I boot up, I use
steam or steam VR to
talk to it. And sometimes
it isn't detected and there's
firmware updates. There's a sense
that it's not like you
just jump into VR and
jump out. There's, there's, you
know, administrative boot up time,
but you don't see that
with like a gear VR.
Is it, you put your
phone in a slot in
your end, is that correct?
Yeah, that's correct. That's essentially
the advantage mobile, mobile VR
has over desktop VR right
now. Cause HTC, Vive and
Oculus are incredibly powerful and
you'll get brilliant stuff. But
if your, but the majority
of users either don't have
the hardware or don't have
the time or just aren't
in the right place. Whereas
a lot of people will
have their phone on them.
So, or may have, or
may have a gear VR,
more accessible so they can
just pop it in. And
the nice thing I like
is, is Google cardboard, which
is fantastic for, for getting
people started because I can,
I can bring a give.
Yeah, I can. Now I
can bring a cardboard to
someone. I show it to
them, show them some VR,
and then I can leave
the cardboard with them to
carry on doing VR stuff
with their own phone, because
they're not massively expensive and
I'm leaving one here or
there. It's just my way
of getting VR out there
a bit more. In fact,
at the conference I gave,
which I mentioned earlier with
the VR people, Google were
kind enough to donate a
hundred cardboards for us so
that everyone there got a
cardboard and they could, they
could have a go and
see what web VR could
do for them. And then
they were already set for
working in virtual reality because
they already had the smartphone
and the Google cardboard, and
they could get started right
there. So the what, what
do we lose? Like what
is the distance between a
$700 VR headset and a
super fancy, you know, video
card, all of which I
had to slowly build up.
It took me a year
basically to like upgrade my
computer until I was ready
to get a Vive versus
taking an existing gear, a
Samsung phone, I haven't and
getting gear VR where like,
what's the distance in quality?
What am I losing? So
partly what you're losing is
just visual fidelity. You simply
like my, my SF and
it might be a fantastically
fast phone, but it's not
gonna push out anywhere near
as many polygons as my
Nvidia 10 80 graphics card.
It's sorry. I'm boasting about
my graphics card there. Yeah.
It's, it's in raw power.
It's not there. You're also
losing the ability to do
positional tracking as well because
HTC, Vive and the, and
the Oculus rift both give
you some kind of limited
positional tracking. So you can
walk around in the space,
but with the gear VR
and the daydream and the
Google cardboard, you're restricted to
only rotational data. So you
can't walk around, but you
can look around. And for,
for most people who do,
who are doing VR for
the first time, that that
is plenty incredible, but I
would love to see more,
more positional tracking done in
the future. But there was
this, there's a great quote,
which, which I love with
regards to this. Cause there's
a lot of people who
think that because mobile phones
can't render as many polygons,
it won't be as accurate.
Therefore it's massive. But if,
if visual fidelity was all
that mattered, we'd be watching
blue rays right now and
not Netflix. So this is
like a really kind of
intense virtual reality version of
the 80 20 rule. Like
80% is pretty fine. Like
we shouldn't feel bad about
that at all. Yes, very
much so. Yes, yes. Do
you, I don't know if
you remember, but there was
a time when, when Walkmans
came out and people said,
no, one's going to do
that. No, one's going to
wear headphones around, like in
public. That would be completely
inappropriate to do that in
public. And then, and now
we have people walking down
the street, literally talking to
themselves and we wonder like,
are you, are you someone
who's disturbed or are you
just on a Bluetooth? Do
you think, like right now
I would feel awkward putting
on VR and sitting on
a train. That just seems
weird. Is that just generational?
Do I just need to
die off before? That will
be okay. Definitely not. Like
I do occasionally see the
odd person wearing a VR
headset on the train or
at the airport and I'd
be guilt. I'd be lying
if I said occasionally, that
wasn't me. But cause sometimes
it's nice just to sit
in a cinema or by
yourself. But right now the
hardware is big. The hardware
is chunky like using, I'm
using a VR headset now
is like using a mobile
phone in the eighties. It's
this massive chunky thing, which,
which you look silly using
it, but you think you're
really cool. But as the
technology gets, I can, I
think we're going to see
a lot more acceptance of
people just being like, okay,
you're putting on your headset.
Especially if the headset looks
semi stylish or is more
integrated in one's lifestyle, but
I don't think we're going
to see this with VR
specifically. I think I can
see VR staying a, something
that exists in the home,
but I think augmented reality
will end up eventually being
on the street. I think
right now that's just inevitable.
Unfortunately, VR and web VR
is a great way to
start working with, with building
virtual reality interfaces and, and
planning for the augmented reality
future, which hopefully won't be
too far off. Do you
feel, so you feel like
it's a hardware thing. Like
if they come up with
a cool way to beam
the light directly into the
back of my eye, as
opposed to obscuring my view
and covering my face, or
like putting it into a
pair of sunglasses, like if
the hollow lens was in,
in buddy Holly style sunglass,
you know, the glasses, then
that might be more socially
acceptable To be fair. I
think, I think the moment
Apple do something, people are
going to accept it because
like stuff with Apple do
people seem to like, so
I think it's going to
be like a big boost
there and I can also,
I can also see, see
it happening when, when it
just becomes too cool that,
that you're not embarrassed of
doing it in public. Like
when it becomes too useful
that you can't put it
down because like you remember
in the early days of
mobile phones, when people were
saying, Oh yeah, everyone's on
their phone all the time.
These days, like, they'd look
so ridiculous, constantly looking at
their glowing rectangle. And, but
what we didn't see was
that they were connecting with
the rest of the world,
through their friends, through their
phone. And I think, I
think once people realizing what
everyone's getting from AI, are
they going to be like,
okay, they're just using AR
to see their stock quotes
or have like the world
enhanced around them. So I
don't know if it's going
to be some, make some
perfect use case or some
perfect hardware or some combination
of the both, but with
the amount of money that's
being put into VR and
AR right now I can,
I can't see it not
happening. That's the question like,
remember just a minute ago,
when they told us we
all needed three D TVs
and now most, you know,
most new TVs kind of
have three B 3d built
in, I think my TV
does 3d, but I don't
care. You know, like I,
we all thought it would
be a thing, but it
wasn't enough. You know, it
was, it was incrementally better.
It sounds like you think
that VR has the potential
to be much more than
incrementally, better. It's it's like
snow crash finally. We're, we're,
we're building personal Holidecks that
we're going to carry in
our pocket. Well, yes, definitely.
I agree with everything you
said there. And I think
the differences it's a matter
of timing, 3d DV came
out, but we had no
way to deliver 3d PV
show to someone because the
bandwidth wasn't high enough, there
wasn't enough, there wasn't enough
content or, or there wasn't
enough people actually producing good
content that was worth watching.
But with VR I can
take, or that won't be
three D I can do,
I can take a three
60 photo using my gear
three 60 camera, which is
just a camera with two
lenses on either side and
takes a full three 60
degree photo. And I can
drop that photo into a
frame. And within minutes I've
got, I can show that
to someone and be like,
I've made this it's on
the web it's life. And
I've gone from camera to
showing someone in a very
short amount of time. So
producing VR content is strangely
enough, much more accessible than
producing 3d content. And even
though it seems counterintuitive since
VR is three D as
well, you can, if you're
doing stuff in real time
where you're just rendering cubes
or dropping in three D
models or animations or putting
in some three 60 degree
video, which are compositing in
the background, it's, you can
do something really incredible without
needing a fancy camera setter
or, or special hardware to
play it on because it
just play on my mobile
phone or, or, or my
five or anything else. So,
yeah, I think, I think
it's the, it's the right
environment for VR right now.
We have the bandwidth to
deliver the content. We have
the content, the tools for
content creation of there and
the energy of the industries
behind that. I would like,
I like I'd put my
money towards, Well, it sounds
like you are. Cause you
know, you, you took the
job Well, okay. Yes. I
am putting my livelihood towards
VR, but that's fantastic. This
is kind of like, this
is my childhood. Like when
I grew up, there are
so many TV shows and
books and movies, which are
all about virtual reality and
going to virtual places, I
kind of feel, this was
like, this was promised to
me from when I was
a young kid and it
kind of felt like all
the stuff I dreamed about
happening then, then is happening
now. And like, I can,
I can stick on headset
and see what it's like
to be on Mars. I
can stick on a headset
and see what it's like
to be in a fantasy
world or, or on a
spaceship. Like it's, I can
go anywhere with, with just
by putting on a gigantic
headset on, but it's Yeah,
that's good. That's well, I
appreciate you Chatting with me
today. I'm going to include
links to all of your
different blog posts, some of
the great three 60 cameras,
like the Samsung gear three
60 and also where people
can get a Google cardboard
so they can experience this
for very inexpensive and then
maybe start getting better hardware.
Well, thank you so much
for having me. I just,
yeah, I hope people give
building virtual reality. Echo, I
mean, Jeff, check out a
frame and just get building
something Very cool. This has
been another episode of Hanselminutes
and we'll see you again
next week. .